I guess we're talking now of Robert Giroux at Cambridge.
Tell me a little bit.
I mean, you didn't intend to do this.
Somebody else was going to do this.
Yeah, it was David David Colston.
It actually attracted Lailene Barker.
David Colston, who wrote Becoming a Poet.
Okay.
He, uh...
had contracted to do the letters, came ill and died.
And Alice Metfessel, the literary executor, asked me to take on the job.
I had already edited the collective prose of Elizabeth Bishop, and I agreed.
I had no idea what a job it was going to be.
I had edited other people's editing of groups of letters, you know, like Sally Fitzgerald's book of Planner and Connor's letters.
Which I think is one of the great things
but it's quite a different thing to edit somebody else's editing artist off and scratch because to my horror I've learned that Colston who might send a number of letters my own letters I'd received from Elizabeth and one or two other things the only letters he had collected were those of Marion Moore and Robert Lowe which of course he needed for his book on becoming a poet
So I had to advertise and send out notices and so on in the New York papers, in London, in Chicago, Los Angeles, and then in Canada.
And then the letters started to pour in.
Really?
Must have plucked it over.
3,000 letters.
Right, right.
And I was astonished, you know, that she had so much correspondence.
And I'm sure there's a lot I didn't get.
Yeah.
So...
I figured at most it would be a book of, you know, 500 letters, which is about one of it.
Right.
So I finally whittled it down.
I had to read all, most of the letters, actually, to find out.
And I segregated them into, you know, what I thought were the most interesting, the most provocative, and key points of her career, and that sort of readability.
you know, intrinsic interest, that sort of rationale.
And I found out, I knew it would have to be a big book, because it had to cover her whole life, and she lived in 1968.
She was hit 70.
She was born in 1911, died in 1978.
So, 67 or 68.
68, she passed her.
I think she made it to 79, actually, I'm not sure.
Last letter in the book will tell you.
That's the day she died.
Tell me.
I should remember that.
Yeah, 79.
You're right.
I know because I had just recently been named book editor.
I remember he died.
Right.
So, it was a long life.
My rationale was simply, as I say, letters with intrinsic interest and also covering key points of her career.
Did you think it would become the kind of autobiography that it did?
Well, I thought it would, to some extent, would have to because it was covering the high points of her career, crucial moments and so on, dramatic incidents, a plot of suicide and so on.
All that had to be somehow dealt with.
So, yes, I mean, because...
I think the drop copy says, it is in a sense a lot of biography.
Her private life wasn't too well known.
I didn't know very much about it.
You mentioned, of course, in your introduction that she really cared, I mean, about writing letters.
She taught a course.
I discovered that.
Allstone didn't seem to know that.
There's William Alford here who teaches here.
I guess he's emeritus now.
But I spoke to him.
He said, oh, yes, you have a course of letters.
I said, love reading letters.
Yes.
So he dug it out.
Do you think that she had any sense that she was writing these letters?
I mean, you mentioned that particularly letters to Marianne Moore or Robert Lowell she really labored over.
Because not for posterity, I don't think.
I think it was just that those are the two people she admired and respected most and felt she had to...
You know, he had her best.
And you can tell, reading them, they're perfectly natural, that is.
But, you know, and it could be Marion Moore, they become more and more relaxed and intimate and so on, friendly.
She was very formal at first, but she was like that with me a couple of years before she sort of, you know.
I guess I never truly appreciated how much of an affection she is.
Oh, you know, right?
And not in her letters.
She found it easy to write letters, thank God, you know, that's why there were so many of them.
But it was in contrast to her poems, which there are so many fragments of interesting poems, you know, poems she started and wouldn't finish or didn't finish.
The fact that she took 16 years to write the moves, I don't know any other poet.
Not a poem, and she promised it to an aunt.
Dedicated to her, yeah.
You've got to wait 16 years to get it, which is wonderful.
In fact, the incident that inspired the poem was like six or seven years earlier than the 16, so it was almost 22 years.
Astonishing.
You know, we talked the first time, I think it was 12 or 13 years ago, at the Players Club in New York.
We were talking about the various writers that you've worked with.
I remember you saying Jack Kerouac was an important writer, but not a green writer.
But this is a legitimate recertified role.
Is this something that you knew at the time, or is this something that just rose gradually?
I didn't know it at the time.
No, I can't say that.
And when you're close to something, as close as that, you're never quite sure.
And, you know, when you think of
how many years she worked, how many years she worked as a writer, I mean, and lived.
See, really, it's a small body of work.
It's a small body, but the collected poems is not a major, it's not a, it's a major book, it's not a huge book.
It's not a huge book, not like Walt Whitman, you know, even Emily Dickinson.
But it took me some years, some experience to learn that she was a perfectionist.
She was harder on her own
Critically speaking, she judged her own work much harder than other people did.
When she finished something, she was always denigrating her own work, a habit I didn't like.
I think it's wrong for her to do that.
She had this puritanical streak of some kind that made her feel that.
It might have been false modesty.
I can't explain it, although she didn't seem false in any way.
When she wrote In the Villages, it was a great story.
Great work of prose, I think.
One of the best stories ever written by an American.
She didn't want to write it.
She said, oh, you know, it's all the fussing about itself.
I don't know, is it really worth all this trouble and so on?
She just, I never heard her say, that's terrific.
That's...
You know, a wonderful thing.
Even when it was wonderful, I could lose.
When you say, pardon me, that she is perhaps, I don't know if you say the greatest, but certainly one of the greatest poets of the present century.
No question.
What is it that separates her from speaking as an editor now?
It's true.
First of all, it's a highly original style.
It is immediately attractive to the general reader like me because it's simple.
There's no nonsense about what he's saying.
There's no obfuscation, you know what I mean.
And no pretense or no artifice, no attempt to conceal.
It's absolutely direct.
And because simplicity is the last thing an artist learns in Beethoven's greatest work with his last quartet, the simplest music you ever wrote.
Shakespeare, to be or not to be, is third grade English when you think about it.
So all monosyllabic words.
Absolutely.
And I don't want to say I have to talk about Shakespeare.
I forgot I didn't get you going.
What's the first line of Hamlet?
How does it open?
And you know the answer is, who's there?
Who's there is about as contemporary as you can get.
Who's there?
And he could use that rubric and say, that's what the play is about.
Is my father hovering around as they go?
You know, just... Anyway, she had that...
a great gift of correctness and communication.
I love that letter to Robert Wall, I mean, about this one word.
I mean, this letter about a single word.
I mean, the selection of the word.
Which one was it?
I can't remember the word, but I kind of forget myself.
But you'd like that, yes.
But this long, this colloquy back and forth about a single word.
He said in his little poem about her, you know, you posted on your bulletin board with empties.
Those are the words.
She has to get the perfect word.
And I had an editor, after she died, they said, oh, she's written a piece about Marion.
Well, I found about seven versions.
And I went through them and
The difference was, you know, very slight.
And you're speaking as an editor now.
Yeah.
And you would have happily accepted the first version?
Absolutely.
There's very little difference between the first one and the last one.
And in the end, I started to say, if I don't do this, it's never going to be printed.
And I just said, you know, this is what she's saying, and that's that.
So she needed an editor.
She was very off-putting, putting in the sense of, you know,
Don't come too close.
She had that.
It's just independence or whatever.
How you define it, it doesn't matter.
You don't have to define it.
She was a perfectionist.
You've already said it.
And to the nth degree, you know, very few writers are.
Marion Moore was, and I think she was influenced by Marion Moore.
She admired that.
Yeah, but the difference between her and Marion Moore is that Marion Moore is, you know,
highly imaginative, and enigmatic, and cryptic.
Elizabeth was more willing to let her work go.
And it seems to be that Elizabeth, you mentioned the seven versions.
Right, right.
She was very, I mean, there comes a point where you have to let this thing fly out of a nest.
And of the fragments, you know, I went through her papers at Vassar.
I was shocked.
Then I found those unpublishments in the collected product.
Marvelous stories.
My wife just finished reading that.
She said, these are wonderful, wonderful stories.
And they would never have appeared if I hadn't.
I felt like I discovered a gold mine.
Mary Moore was the most puzzling to me because she obviously worked so hard on it.
That's an illustration where she re-typed the whole thing.
She did that in the village.
I'm getting sick and tired of re-typing.
Why does she have to re-type the whole thing?
Other people, including Emily Dickinson, would make corrections.
And Mary Moore.
Mary Moore used to have a number of her letters, and she corrects them.
She'll write you a letter of pen and ink.
She'll edit it.
How do you suppose she would have responded to the word processing?
I doubt if she could have.
I can't go with it.
The beauty of it is the endless opportunity that gives you to revise.
Maybe she would have liked it.
I think that's one of the reasons that books, non-fiction books, are getting longer and longer is because you can insert things with ease.
You don't have to read this whole manuscript.
It's not the chore used to be.
That's true.
You mentioned Walt Whitman, of course, who did nine versions of this concept.
And no one was better than the first.
Song of Myself is a masterpiece.
Then it gets, you know, more and more rhetorical.
I'm not familiar with her work cap.
Even though work was completed work, do you think she'd like to have a little whack at it?
She talked about it.
She made a little fun of Lowell, you know, Rob.
And in her last poem, after his death,
You revise, revise, revise, and so on.
But she did, too.
She did, too.
And that one poem that Alice Quinn called, did you see the New Yorker excerpt from this book?
The little sonnet she ends with.
That's a revised version.
That's not what the New Yorker printed.
And it's a brilliant, there's something about the self-divided, which is a marvelous theme for her.
But the first version was not that.
I forget what it was.
The word had a rhyme with divided, decided, or something like that.
A creature undecided is the second one.
That's the better one.
Do you feel like, you mentioned that part of her greatness lies in her accessibility, I guess.
I do.
Absolutely.
Do you think that this is a quality that other poets see in her work?
I mean, look at the tribute that she's getting tomorrow evening.
It's true, yes.
What do you think of that?
She's greatly admired her.
I don't know any other...
contemporary poet who doesn't really think she's, you know, she's the poet's poet, and she's not poetic in the old-fashioned sense of that word, you know, posture, anything but.
She's very colloquial, you might have one more so much.
It's natural speech.
And I connect all this to Nova Scotia.
The fact that she grew up on a farm, or at least a rural
in a rural background, very homely people.
I mean, you know, in the old, again, in the old-fashioned sense of, you know, no city-fied artificiality.
So we're building a cow and riding around with him.
And there were demons, there were ghosts that she had.
Yes.
There's one letter where she mentions, I'm now the same age as my father when he died.
You know, that's an awareness, isn't it?
Absolutely.
She had that.
She was ultra-aware.
She wouldn't be the genius she is.
She had that extra sensory perception of whatever it is, seven cents, eight cents.
She had it very well.
And you wouldn't think it.
You know, if you met her and talked to her, it would just be an ordinary conversation, and yet you... How could she write poems as, you know, as brilliant as the one she does, like the moose?
The moose starts out as a bus ride, and then suddenly...
You know, it's all about life, meaning of life.
Very heavy words, not a word she ever uses.
People start falling asleep and then she remembers her grandparents talking in the feather beds.
I don't know how she does it, it's sort of magical.
I've heard it said about writers that I've interviewed over the years.
Maybe it's true, maybe it's not.
Perhaps you as an editor could comment.
Every writer aspires to write a novel, and they say every novelist aspires to be a poet.
I mean, I know certainly that's true without that in many respects.
Do you agree with that?
I think many writers do.
Yes, it is.
It's the height of language.
Why is that, do you think?
Is it just something that human expression, I guess, is... I think so, and it has nothing to do with history, the way...
You know, the arts develop in history, that is to say, you know, if you're a musician, if you don't write a symphony, you're not.
If you're not a musician.
And so on is the most difficult thing.
But there are novelists who don't, I mean, there are minorities who don't aspire in that direction.
They don't ever talk about it.
But I agree with what you say, that it's a goal or a name that's very high.
As an editor, do you enjoy editing poetry?
Oh, yes, I always have.
And I started out with Lowell, you know.
Not a bad one.
That was an accident.
Because, you know, I read poetry in college and so on.
But I was working with Jean Stafford on her first novel, Lost an Adventure.
And she one day said, I'd like you to have lunch with my husband.
And, you know, he's writing poems.
He might have a manuscript to show you.
It was Lord Rory's castle.
So I started out with that.
And I met Eliot, but I can't say I was Eliot's editor, because he already had the Nobel Prize.
I thought I was part of his career.
It's just an accident that I met him.
I'm sorry, who was that?
I'd say it was just an accident that I met him, because he was a friend of Frank Morley, who was my boss.
Did I ever tell you the story?
No.
Listen, right after the war, I got out of the Navy in 46, I guess it was.
And Morley told me, you know, T.S.
Eliot is coming to New York.
This was before he got the Nobel Prize in 48, I guess.
This was 46.
I was, you know, so glad to be back out of the Pacific and back in my office.
And suddenly Morley walked into my office with Elliot and said, Bob, Mr. Elliot wants to take you to lunch.
I don't dream it.
For some mix-up, Elliot had just landed at easy sail.
Then he came into New York, on one of the ocean liners in those days.
And thinking he was going to lunch with Frank Morley, and Morley couldn't do it, so...
I was chosen because I was scared, really, you know.
I thought, what can I say to this man?
I like reading your poems.
And he put me completely easy.
He was very, very, very fine about it.
He said, as one editor to another, do you have much author trouble?
And because I laughed, I had me laugh.
And he laughed and said, listen.
He's very easy to talk to him.
You're probably just a kid if you think, actually.
I was, I was in my 20s.
Well, I was 29.
Oh, that's true.
Yeah, well, that's true.
To be dealing with T.S.
Eliot.
Right.
And, uh, well, I mean, therefore, I was pushed in the direction of poetry just by history, by my autobiography, so to speak.
You've lost a couple of years.
really fine writers in recent years.
I mean, about my very favorite stuff.
I mean, I thought Walter Percy was the finest living.
Yeah, he was a great, great stylist.
Yeah.
Right.
I have everything of his, a first edition signed.
I mean, I just, uh, of course, from Ballamone, uh, was another great thing.
Oh, Barry was a great friend.
And I thought there'd be more posthumous stuff, but I guess that one, that one collection, yes.
And Percy surprised me, too.
I know.
I guess what they had was out there.
Did that surprise you?
I don't mean to jump from one to the other now.
No.
Two other executives with me from Malamud and Malamud helped me to track down all the stuff.
He hadn't finished the last novel, which would have been a very good book, I think.
Very important book, but in a very interesting book.
Any letters there?
Well, there are letters.
They're all done at the, we're thinking of that now.
They're done at the Library of Congress.
Gave all his papers to the Library of Congress.
His son is interested in working on this.
He's called me up a couple of times, so something may come of that.
How about Percy?
Percy has just done one book, what Sam Patrick Samway did, of the essays, and reviews and stuff.
Well, there's a novel, there's an unfinished novel, but I haven't seen it.
Is there?
Well, I don't know.
It's exciting in a way, isn't it?
It is, but I don't know how far it goes, you know.
Yeah, what do you think with me?
I mean, as an editor, again, they brought out that Hemingway novel a couple years ago.
Yeah, I remember that.
Jinx was the chapter of thirds of that.
No.
So you wonder if it was worth doing, or is it Hemingway's work, or is it Jinx's work?
It's terrible.
We really had a lot of...
We had long discussions with Ann and the other executives.
There was Kim Seldes, another writer that's just kind of on my head this minute, and the three of us.
And we really, for a long while, we didn't think we were going to publish the, was it called God's People?
I can't remember that.
And, you know, it was a marvelous concept and theme.
And so we thought it really,
And he left notes about the conclusion so he could get the whole picture.
I'm glad we did it.
You were toying with the idea once, as I recall, of writing a book about nine writers.
First novels, no.
I'm now doing a book just about writers I've known.
That sounds nice.
Yeah.
They keep asking me to write my memoirs, but I get self-conscious and sort of inhibited when I think of that.
you know, memoirs or autobiography.
But I can write about Gene Stafford or Carl Sandburg, who's another poet, and a very different kind of poet from... Who are some of the other writers that you might, that would be in there?
Paul Kerouac, Randall Jarrell, I did all his early poetry, Flannery O'Connor, Walter Percy, Bernard Malamud,
Oh, dozens and dozens, but I'm always going to write about publishers.
I'm going to write about both Mr. Harcourt and Mr. Brace.
Their story has never been told, you know.
I really have an interesting insight into all that.
Well, you were there for quite a few years.
Yeah, I started, and it's hard to think, and it's hard to believe anymore.
I started in 1940.
It's about 50 years.
One of the 94.
Not for the record, but it is kind of exciting to see what's happened to that company.
I know.
And what's that with the publishing?
Yeah.
It's pretty awful.
All these mergers and all that kind of stuff.
Helen Wolfe just died.
She was a very fine editor.
Pantheon, started Pantheon.
I knew her very early.
I knew her husband, Kurt Wolfe.
And
They just don't.
What a useful infant they were.
Yeah.
Beautiful infant.
And now they're just doing other basically random households.
That's right.
That excitement isn't there.
Any other writers that you think of before we... Oh, I have tons of them.
Some of you don't.
No, people don't.
No, I'm not even going to talk about...
Writers who never progressed or never developed one or two cases of that.
Why that happened is very strange, you know.
Almost... And these writers who had published things and just kind of... Yeah, started out, you know.
Well, I think Salinger's a good example.
He stopped writing, what, 30 years ago?
It's astonishing.
Such a...
talented man and in a way you can't explain it it's just do you think he's writing somebody said he had written he had completed seven of them and threw them in the fireplace and i said i don't believe that i think if i did that much work yeah they'd at least make a copy before they threw them that's right you remember when capote died i thought they were going to find all this right
That was a big... Yeah, well, but he had really physically deteriorated some drugs.
He got on tires on one day on television.
I was in a bar.
It felt sad to him.
Yeah.
Shouldn't have done it.
But I mean, that fragment that was left was basically worthless.
Absolutely.
I'm not going to quote you on this.
No, no, but I...
He didn't have the energy and the capacity anymore.
Whatever talent he had had burned out.
These are pretty rare things now, letter collections.
It's true.
And a lot of it is accidental in the fact that she lived in South America.
Everybody she knew was up here.
I mean, there were telephones when most of these were written.
Right.
And she did use the phone.
But I know our earliest friend, Franny Blau,
who lives in New York, and her daughter is the one who designed this book, Cynthia Krupad, is actually Franny's daughter.
And she's a marvelous, marvelous typographer and designer.
And she had saved every letter.
She knew that she said from early, you know, high school days, boarding school, long uphill high school.
She'd not let me say that every letter, every envelope, you know, right from the start.
She knew.
She said we all knew Bishop was a genius.
I called him Bishop at boarding school.
And she turned it on.
She had it all filed and boxed, very much appreciated by an editor, you know.
It was all marvelously codified and marked.
And there was a big gap.
And I said, Franny, did I lose something?
It was about
six years in there.
And she said, Bob, that's when Elizabeth moved to New York.
So we're on the phone every day.
She said, well, let her know about this with Elizabeth.
You know, it was like the same time.
But you had other correspondents who picked up the slack in that shape.
Sure.
Are there any people, I mean, I can't believe the variety of people that you wrote to here.
Are there people that you feel are there that you didn't get?
Yes.
I'm sure of it because... Are there any of those that come to mind that you think should be... Well, the one interesting example I'm going to read her letter tomorrow is Miss Pearson.
I don't know if you noticed that letter.
It's a stranger.
I don't know what her name is, except her last name is Pearson.
And the book was in galleys.
And I sent a set to a couple of people for comments.
One of them was James Merrill.
And he said, oh, Bob, I meant the meaning of looking through it.
The book is marvelous, but there's a letter you should see, you know.
And I said, well, where did you get this letter?
He said, it was at Amherst.
They were having an autographing thing in the local bookstore.
And some man came up and said, here's a very interesting letter by Elizabeth Fisher.
And he said, I started to read him.
By the time I wanted to talk to him, he'd disappear.
It was just a copy.
It wasn't the original letter.
But he never got the man's name and never found out how the man got Holden's name.
Well, I put it in the book.
Well, we might get the answer to that.
I really don't want to ask you about the content.
The content is self-explanatory, I guess.
Good evening.
I know you've had a long day, and you get up from New York, so I don't want to take up too much time.
No, that's all right.
It's easy to talk about, I guess.
When Ida told me you were coming, I said, gee, I'd love to talk to you.
Well, I know.
I was delighted to hear that.
I'd be seeing you again, because I remember.
Let me say also, you know, I've done this on tape.
It was more of a chore at the beginning than I expected.
I didn't realize it would be such hard work.
Because previously I edited other people's collections because I had a manuscript.
Putting that manuscript together took me six years.
And, you know, I had a reason.
How can you make a selection unless you read everything first, you know, window it out?
and it took six years and i was i was a little overwhelmed you know the first two years because as i began to get on top of it and i didn't know how to use the word process and i couldn't learn too late for me and i had to use pick away at a typewriter and so on and handwriting was terrible i think it was i think there were only two words you couldn't penetrate i guess right
In the end, but it got better and better.
Then I realized it was going to be a very good book because I was very pleased.
But I had to get over that original difficulty.
There aren't many writings that you've been doing it for.
No.
That's right.
Or worth doing it for.
And it became obvious that it was in her case.
So that's my home address.
I'll put my phone down, too.
If you don't mind, I'm just going to use it.
Well, my thing, you never know.
I've got to think.
Were there any great surprises for you here?
Yes, I didn't really know the whole story about the suicide.
I heard very wrong versions of it.
There was the one with Maria Osa.
She had sent me a couple of letters, and she said, of course, I can't send you all the letters that I have, because, you know, it's all... Perhaps too... She didn't use the word scandalous, but that's what she meant.
And I said, look, I have everything, got everything, and you mustn't hold back.
This is posterity.
We have to know about it.
So she sent me the most personal letters.
And then there were a couple from Lauren McIver, who is a painter, still living.
She's in her 80s.
Very interesting woman.
She was married to Lloyd Frankenberg, who was a poet, who killed himself.
I knew Lloyd years ago.
And she had several letters.
She said, I don't know whether I can give you these, Bob.
And I said, why can't you give them to me?
And she said, well, as you'll see at the end, Elizabeth says,
destroy these letters or please burn these letters.
And I said, but Lauren, you haven't.
You haven't.
So they're now, you know, they're extant.
They're part of history.
It's like Kafka directing that everything be destroyed.
Absolutely.
Well, those were the two extremist examples.
One other quick question.
You do mention that you feel that she's actually worth a multi-volume letter.
Yes, I do.
How about this?
Well, I think so, because a lot of them are about poetry.
I couldn't use all the letters I wanted to because it becomes too technical.
Looking at all her letters to Lowell and her letters to Marion Moore, and other poets who corresponded with it, she was very critical.
She had a marvelous faculty of not kidding, you know, she's a
I'm going to be very critical.
If you don't like criticism, I won't write you at all.
And of course, there's nothing personal in this.
I'm just telling you how it strikes me, and I'll be very honest with you.
She did it to Loa.
It's astonishing.
I don't know what you're lying for.
What are you trying to say?
Do you think she's been a good editor?
Yes.
On poetry, especially.
But I think I'm going on anything, because...
She was so meticulous.
She was just demanding.
Yeah, I remember when I wrote a packet copy, a flop copy, you know, for her first book of hers I worked on, which is Ellen Amor.
She tore it apart.
And I was like, I've been slightly lazy, and I just couldn't get by her.
I love the letters where she's telling me the color cloth that she was.
You did a wonderful, I mean, I do things like look at the cloth.
Oh, I love it.
That's Cynthia.
Isn't that colorful?
Isn't that great?
It's such one of the handsomest findings.
I love the jacket, but I'd like to put it on my shelf without it.
Yeah, you could do both.
Thanks, Nick.
Thank you.